yo yo what's going on joshua taught in
raw form and welcome to another help me
davon tutorial and today in this help me
devon tutorial i'll be showing you guys
some pro tips on mixing your background
vocals now this song that i'm about to
show you right now is one of my own
songs it's called popular let's take a
listen to the background vocals
[Music]
okay so that's the song as far as the
background vocals you can hear that that
background vocal really complements that
lead vocal it's a support it's not too
overpowering but it's just enough and
it's a great bed for the lead vocal to
be supported by now before we go any
further i'm going to ask you guys to
comment like subscribe also make sure at
any time in the tutorial you can visit
helpmedivan.com to get some of our
templates vocal chains and presets to
help support this channel now back to
the tutorial
now what i'm going to do is i'm going to
break this down into individual steps
what i'm going to do is and first and
foremost is i'm going to let you listen
to these background vocals for how they
stand so let's listen to the background
vocals in solo so you can get an idea of
what they sound like check this out
go here solo this listen to these
background vocals
[Music]
so you could hear them they're not
absolutely perfect but it's basically a
four-part harmony what do i mean when i
say four-part harmony basically it's
sets of two that are singles that are
all together so basically these two
right here which let me just take this
off
these two right here
are their own note so listen closely to
this watch
[Music]
and then this other set is its own
cadence as well
and so these four part harmonies in sets
of two are blended together to create
that harmony now for some of you you
knew that and some of you just getting
into the harmony stuff this is just some
information for you so the first thing
i'm going to show you guys as far as
mixing this kind of stuff is how to
attack the individual tracks themselves
so of course there's a group thing that
we're gonna do as far as how we attack
it but there's also or more importantly
there's a single way that you can attack
each track first before you start doing
any heavy heavy processing i'll show you
exactly what that means
so now we're going to go to the actual
tracks
and i'm going to move on over to here
so right here when i say the individual
tracks i mean mid od1 and mid od2 if you
don't know what that means it means mid
over dub one mid over dub two so this is
my mid part of my harmony
and this is the individual track that it
actually resides on now as you can see
there's an nls channel there's an auto
tune there's an rvox and a set in a cla
76 now will i explain to you is this
what i like to do with the individual
tracks before there's any other
processing that goes after it is i like
to basically get that thing tight think
about it like this when you're in a the
large format kind of studios and stuff
like that or just have the blessing to
have a lot of equipment a lot of times
what you do is you'll compress those
vocals in now the benefit of compressing
those vocals in is that you get a more
concise vocal one that isn't so quiet
and loud and dynamic but more or less
tighter so what am i gonna do i'm going
to try and make sure that i compress
those vocals individually first before i
send them to any bus routing to actually
do any processing because instead of
having the left one that i'm panning um
uh that very quiet and the right one
really loud now i have a sound that's
more cohesive between the both of them
because i've compressed them both so it
just helps with your dynamics a little
bit it's as far as my experience and
compressing both of those uh uh or the
individual
background tracks so that they're more
cohesive so that when you actually do
some group processing it's a lot better
and it's a little bit more cohesive and
tighter okay
stay with me i'll explain that group
processing later down the line
so let's focus on this one single place
right here and the biggest takeaway what
i'll show you is the auto tune
and the auto tune basically i set it the
same way that i set up my uh my lead
vocal so as you can see i have a re-two
speed of 11 put it on legato i've
learned that legato just sounds a little
bit better as far as if you're looking
for a more natural sounding auto-tune
sound
and i have my human eyes at 18 just to
clean it up just a little bit and that's
it as far as my auto tune is concerned
now my arbox my rvox is literally doing
no processing whatsoever the only thing
it's doing is it's gating the only thing
i'm using this rbox for is to use it as
a gate so check this out it's just
helping me with tucking it as soon as it
goes off so i can get rid of any noise
or background information that comes
through when there's no vocal present
this helps me a lot with avoiding build
up as far as that between the vocals so
i don't want so much of that buildup of
any room noise because my room isn't as
perfect and i'm sure a lot of our rooms
aren't perfect and it helps me just kind
of tame that down as it's in between
those phrases of silence got me cool
so now what's really doing the heavy
lifting
is this plug-in right here and this is
in
a cla 76 and basically what i'm using
this for is i'm using this to get a
little bit of volume and just maybe
compressing just slightly now granted
i will warn you of this
you may not see so much compression on
this vocal right now and the reason why
is because it's such a straight sound
it's not really something that is
dynamic that has cadences it's really
straight so really what i was looking
for was a little bit more volume as
opposed to more compression this is how
you make better compression decisions
when you're looking at compression or
when you're looking to do any
compression at all really you're doing
it to
to bring the disparity between the
loudest sound and the quietest sound
closer together so if you have a sound
that's
what's really the difference between the
quieter sound and the loudest sound
there really isn't much difference so do
i need a ton of compression no because
really there's no difference between the
quietest sound and the loudest sound in
between as far as that uh particular
phrase is concerned and that's basically
what my harmonies were we're just oozing
off so i don't even have much
compression on this just more or less a
volume boost so check this out
so let's take a look at what the
compressor is doing
got it now what i'm gonna do is this and
you can see that's really not even
compressing much so what i'm gonna do is
i'm gonna take i'm gonna take both of
the compressors off i'll play it without
and i'll play it with so this is without
the compressors this is me taking off
all the processing
[Music]
now let's put both of them back on
do you notice that i get a little bit
more just volume out of the sheer phrase
and like i said i didn't need much
compression or didn't want to do too
much compression because it's just a
single phrase i didn't have this dynamic
ooh
it was just straight
and don't make fun of me so that's why
you don't see much compression you just
see more or less a volume boost from the
cla 76 as far as a compressor on the
individual bus track
all right
the next thing i'm going to explain to
you in this next step is called the
routing and would i say the routing what
do i mean well if you come on over here
and you look at my session
you'll notice this
you'll notice that for every two
background vocals there's a bus that
comes right after it so basically high
od 1 high od 2
is feeding the high bus
mido d1 middle d2 is fitting the mid bus
etc etc why am i doing this the reason
why i'm doing it is because it creates a
more cohesive uh grouping for me to
control the vocals now as opposed to me
putting up a ton of plugins on the on
the one vocal on the left uh
just like i'm putting on the right now i
can just group them together and
basically affect them in their totality
to have a more cohesive sound so this is
something i like to do a lot of times
when it comes to my backgrounds and i
usually like to group them according to
their notes meaning is this the high
part of the harmony so let's affect that
by itself is this the mid part of the
harmony let's group that and
and affect that by itself this is the
low etc so that's what you're seeing as
far as my routing now how did i do this
routing i'll show you if you're a
beginner to this whole thing i'll show
it to you quickly
basically all i did was i said hi od 1
high od 2
i went to bus
and what i did was i went all the way
down to a bus and i put them out to high
uh
harm high bus right here and that's
basically inputting right here on this
side right here let me show you a better
view so basically these two are going
out and feeding into this bus right here
which thus allows us to have signal that
is right here on this track from both of
them and you reserve and keep your pans
as far as where you placed it in the
stereo field now granted i'm a big fan
of hard left hard right you can use that
to your own advantage or choose how you
would like to pan your stuff uh for
yourself so the next thing i want to
show you guys is the bus processing and
basically with the bus processing i'm
taking the individual tracks that i've
affected and i'm taking them and i'm
grouping them into a singular place that
i can affect them
in its totality together so basically
that middle d1 in middle d2 i'm sending
out going to this this bus and i'm
affecting them uh
together in one singular place so that i
can have full functionality and control
over the entire harmony part as it is
one i'm gonna show you my bus processing
now
okay so with my bus processing first
thing i did was i added a little bit of
this uh nls channel it is analog
saturation emulation for you sticklers
out there and it's not doing much it's
just a really really slight effect that
it has on a vocal and i feel like it
just adds a little bit of a tone that i
like
the big thing that i added was some eq
now the first thing i did with this eq
and i used two eqs uh in in back to back
which you'll see in a second for this f6
rta basically what i did was i rolled
off a lot of the low end you'll see that
i pulled out a bunch of the 208 hertz
range for some of that muddiness you'll
also see that i pulled out a good amount
of the 314 hertz range which gets rid of
some of that boxiness for me sometime uh
when it comes to that now now i like to
typically roll off a little bit more
than usual when it comes to background
vocals uh i like to leave more room for
the lead vocal and things of that nature
and you're gonna see that in my next eq
start this is me just really getting rid
of some problems that i heard in the
vocal i'll let you get a listen for it
you'll see that i took out a little bit
of the 2 700 hertz range a little bit of
the 780 hertz range and a little bit of
that 469. so let's hear it before and
after without
[Music]
so the effect is very very slight what
you'll notice is in this next one you'll
hear a big difference
so now we're looking at the ssl channel
and with this ssl channel i want you to
just look at it as an eq i didn't use
the compressor section at all i'm gonna
do a before and after let's listen to
what it sounds like now without
[Music]
you'll notice that it felt a lot more
airy it felt a lot more open and it felt
a lot lighter on your ear um this is on
purpose and i'm going to show you
exactly the settings that i did
so basically what you'll see is i rolled
off a bunch at the 300 hertz range
almost 9 db i rolled up a lot of low end
on this vocal and the reason why i
rolled up a lot of low end and a vocal
just to let you know is because when it
comes to the main vocal i do want to
differentiate the the sonics and sound
of the background vocal versus the lead
vocal it needs to sound different it
needs to stand out in its own way so in
order to make that lead vocal still feel
like i am in control and lead i like to
roll off a lot of that low end on that
background vocal so that it feels and
sounds different now this is just a
thing to taste and this is song by song
bases but for this particular song this
is something that i kind of try for most
of the time and roll off a lot of that
low end more than usually you would
usually do on a lead vocal just so it
gives you a little bit more of an airier
and edgier sound like i said
case-by-case basis this doesn't go for
every single song
the next thing i did was i took out some
of the 890 hertz range uh about 3.4 db
the reason why i usually do that is
because i feel like it adds it's that
that particular range has a certain type
of presence to it that i felt needed to
just be pulled back so i pulled some of
that back
next thing i did was take some of the
3.5 kilohertz out um just so i can make
a little bit more room for the vocal as
far as the lead is concerned and then
the biggest takeaway i want to give you
guys is i boost it at 11 000 hertz which
is where i get that air from and you'll
see i boosted about 4.5 db in that
particular range
now the next thing i did was i added
another compressor now this compressor i
assure you is probably not even doing
anything it's just there for a little
bit of a volume boost let's take a
listen
now let's take it off listen again
[Music]
now you notice that when it was engaged
it felt a lot stronger it felt like it
was just just overall louder and just
felt a lot stronger and this is what
adding no compression this is just me
using the the emulation of the actual
compressor to just give me a little bit
more of a thicker and more bitier sound
which i noticed a lot with the blacky
version of the cla76 and just gave me a
little bit of a volume boost i said all
right let's boost this volume up let's
get this thing a little bit louder so
that it can actually be blended in later
on
so barely any compression um and i got
it to sound like this already
next thing i did was i added a c4
compressor and what a c4 compressor is
is a multi-band compressor of course to
i'm sure some of you may have this
already in your arsenal and i'm going to
show you what it's doing without first
[Music]
okay so when you listen to that you
notice that it kind of tamed and tucked
that low mid kind of stuff a lot more
and it allowed us to get a little bit
more volume out of the vocal i felt like
as i was boosting it what i heard was
not that the overall vocal needed to be
a group of vocals needed to be
compressed but more or less just that
bottom side and i said i don't want that
boominess to kind of come up but i want
more of that edgy airy stuff to come up
so by compressing that low mid frequency
i was able to bring up the entire sound
and that allowed for more of that bitier
brighter kind of sound um to come out
for the background vocals so this was my
settings
so long story short as you can see it's
really just the left side over here
which is right here uh from the 40 hertz
to the 588
hertz range and you can see that i'm
compressing it pretty well i'll let you
see how much compression
so i'm roughly getting about 3 db of
gain reduction in this particular range
from the 40 hertz to the 588 hertz range
and it's basically just helping me just
to mitigate that low mid frequency which
is this right here
[Music]
and as you can see i have a pretty fast
attack and a fast release now you can
just go back to this video you can
screenshot this take a look at it so you
can get an understanding of my settings
but for the most part this is the only
region that was really affected in this
process now to get on to some of the
funkier stuff within this bus processing
so right here in the bus processing what
i use is a doubler 4. i'm going to play
it for you without the double of 4 and
with check this out
[Music]
so when you listen to that you notice
that it feels a lot softer it feels like
it got uh the stereo image just kind of
felt a little bit wider and a little bit
more wobbly it felt like it had a little
bit more movement as opposed to just
feeling oh i feel like it's like oh
it feels kind of spacey and it added
these other voices to it to make it
sound a little bit more full and soft
and now granted i can turn the double or
four up just to kind of compensate for
that volume loss that we had but i like
the sound of it i was cool with it i was
like this sounds a lot nicer it just
felt softer and it kind of felt like the
middle information just kind of moved
out the way just a little bit which i
want because that'll help me with my
lead vocal in getting that to sit in
place and it has the idea the
the feeling of it has more vocals than
the just two now it feels like i've
added more vocals so that's why i like
to use a doubler
so basically i used a very very basic
setting in the plugin it's called
doubler for voices check this out punch
that in and you're good to go it's a
really cool preset that i like to use on
my background vocals
next thing i did was
i got this r comp and this r comp is
doing a very slight bit of compression
not even much check this out
so you can see it's just taking a slight
piece it's not much it's just catching
those ooh moments to kind of control
them a little bit and that's why i had
that compressor there just to catch
those little little little tiny little
slight moments with the compression
now settings i did a fast attack and a
pretty fast release because i really
wasn't looking for much compression i
just was looking to attack just those
little small transient initial moments
so that they don't pop out too much when
you're listening to them
now the last thing i did on this
particular processing as far as the bus
is concerned was i took out some of the
2015 hertz range or better yet
the 2 kilohertz range why did i take out
some of the two kilohertz range well
that's the range where mostly our vocal
presence resides so for me when i said
to my vocal when i looked at my lead
vocal i heard it in comparison to the
backgrounds and i said ah i want to kind
of pull a little bit more attention away
from those backgrounds because i want
those to really sit as a guide or a bed
i want them to support the lead vocal
not overpower it or out shine it so
that's why i took out a little bit of
that 2k frequency just so i can get a
little bit more presence for the lead
vocal to live that's the only reason i
did that once again that's case by case
for this particular song i just pulled a
little bit of that out because i wanted
the
background vocals just to have a little
bit uh less precedent in the mix okay
all right and that was the last thing i
did for my bus processing
now the next thing that i did for my
background vocals was the effects
processing when i say effects processing
i'm referring to reverbs delays and
phasers and flanges and things of that
type of uh
family and basically what i use this for
is to create texture to to create a more
realistic sound and the reason why i say
more realistic sound is because when it
comes to you know making things feel
believable reverbs and delays can help
you accomplish those types of spaces if
you want a vocal to feel more lush a
nice reverb with a long tail can help it
feel that way so this is how we create
the feeling is through the effects
processing okay
okay
so as you can see this is our effects
processing what i'm running is i'm
running a short verb a long verb a
doubler and a fourth delay you can
totally ignore this right here i'll
explain that in another tutorial another
day but don't worry about this at all so
this is a short verb a long verb a
doubler and a fork my short verb
is feeding
and let me take all this stuff off my
short verb is feeding
this right here which is a pro r and
it's a play verb long story short i'm
using it as a plate in a sense because
i'm using it with a very very short uh
reverb time now granted the preset i
have here is vocal clear space but for
the most part when it comes to my plate
verbs or my short verbs i like to use
them because they add a little bit of a
stereo feel to your vocal without it
making it without making it feel so
obvious if that makes any sense or
affecting the sound that you've created
so basically i like to use plate verbs
to give me more of a stereo feel for my
vocal now what i'm going to do is i'm
going to take this short verb and i'm
going to boost it up and i want you to
see how it feels okay
this is my short verb right here
one sec and let's bring it down and i'll
bring it up and listen to how much it
affects the vocal as we bring it up
okay so you hear it and you notice this
like metallic kind of feeling and it
adds somewhat of a of a stereo uh feel
to the vocal and it also
feels like it adds a little bit of a
tail and i like this sound because it
makes it feel
like it sits higher up in the mix and
that's why i like to use plate verbs
even on my lead vocals because it just
adds a little bit more of a stereo uh
feeling and uh uh puts the vocals in a
in a particular place that feels a
little bit more realistic in the song
all right so that was basically my short
verb the next thing it's feeding is my
long verb and my long verb which let's
turn it on
my long verb is also feeding a pro r but
it's using a preset called cathedral one
and long story short i'm going to put
this way down and then i'll pull it up
and let you get an idea of what it's
doing so way down first
[Music]
so what it's helping me create is it's
helping me create this wonderful tale
on the actual background vocals and it
makes the vocals feel a lot more ghosty
and mystical and and impressive and
that's why i like to use long verbs when
it comes to background vocals from time
to time if i'm looking for that more
ghostly and smooth kind of sound because
it adds that lush tail now what are my
settings like i told you i use the
cathedral one and you'll see right here
that my um space is 3.07
that's the particular space or timing as
far as the reverb is concerned that i
found nice i'm really a big fan of pro
r's reverb because it allows me to do
things like setting the distance to
close far it allows me in a simple
simple way to kind of fine-tune my
reverb dark to bright i can make the
reverb darker i can make the reverb
brighter now granted you can do this in
a bunch of other uh reverb plugins i'm
sure but i just really like how this one
does it uh especially for this
particular song
all right
next thing i did was i added a doubler
plugin and basically all my doubler
plugin was was a doubler and i kind of
showed you how i'd use the doubler
before the other plugins but basically
what this is going to do is it's going
to send out a copy of the vocals that we
used and it's going to just give me a
little bit more of a push on the side
information as far as just the width of
it so
the way i accomplish this is i add the
doubler plug-in with the basic doubler
preset but i also add a s1 imager to
kind of spread that out a little bit so
that it pushes them to the side and so
what i'll do is i'll bring this all the
way down and bring it up check out what
the double plug-in does
[Music]
so when you listen to it you notice like
yo i kind of feel like it like the sides
i didn't realize it could be pushed out
that far you feel like it kind of comes
up on the sides of your headphones or on
your speakers and it just adds a little
bit more of a more stereo feel to your
uh background vocals without really
interrupting the sonics of what they
just originally sound like and this is a
really dope trick that i even try on my
lead vocals don't tell anyone and it
really just adds a stereo kind of
feeling to whatever vocal that you're
working on
all right let's put that back
the last thing that i'm going to show
you as far as the effects processing is
this
it's a delay and basically i used a
quarter note delay and the quarter note
delay is basically adding a little bit
of a
i guess you could say tail as well and
i'm using these echo boys let me show
you exactly what it sounds like i'm
gonna bring this down
so that's pretty evident you can hear it
it's that
it's kind of adding a little bit more of
this tail and it's bounced to the vocal
that helps it feel more realistic and
this is important this is what i always
say as far as creating these vocal
spaces and and mixing your vocals what
i'm really trying to accomplish is
making them sound realistic as far as
what the emotion is of what i'm trying
to bring out of the entire thing that's
my biggest biggest takeaway for it
and the last thing you keep in mind is
to blend your harmonies now that you
mixed everything and kind of had this
sound as you were listening back and
forth with the music that's what you
should have been doing now you're
basically just blending your mids with
your lows with your highs and finding
the right balance and thus accomplishing
a sound like this
[Music]
so guys that was my tutorial on some pro
tips uh to basically mixing your
background vocals i really hope that was
helpful make sure you comment like and
subscribe also make sure you follow us
help me devon on instagram and also make
sure you visit healthydavon.com at any
time to get some of our vocal chains and
templates to keep this channel going and
to support us make sure also that you
follow our discord community as well to
get a bunch of engineers uh and meet
them and to pick up game and share
information like we always do so i hope
you guys enjoyed that tutorial please
let me know in the comments below
anything you wanted to see or any
questions you have and until next time
you guys